## Breeding Across Isolated Populations of Skyros Lizards

### Introduction
Skyros is a large island of the coast of Greece, surrounded by several other small islands. This system acts as a miniturized model for the Island Speciation theory. This realm of biology seeks to answer questions about how genetic drift between isolated populations can promote speciation. The Skyros lizards are distributed across the main island ("mainland") and across many smaller nearby islands ("islets"). I intend to use existing data on the breeding of mainland and islet lizards (Runemark & Svensson 2012, and others) to understand how the geographic separation of these populations affect the behavioral, morphological and even pheromonal compatibility across this distance gradient. This analysis will help inform our understanding of speciation. 

### Summary of Data
#### Goals of the Original Studies
As I   am using data from a number of Runemark's papers, there were several original goals for this breadth of data. The primary data set that I am using to understand the ultimate breeding capatity between individuals from different locations was orginally used to determine how male throat morphology (variety in coloration and snout size) impacts sexual selection. I will also be incorporating data from a study which examined if mate scent preference impacted premating isolation (non-breeding populations separated not by genetics or organ morphology but by behavioral or other means). The original use of the pheromonal data was just to determine whether islet individuals prefered other islet scents (and vice verse for mainland). Whereas, I will use actual distance measurements for all of my analyses in order to determine if the islets are more divergent just due to distance or if the sea barrier is really acting as a promoter of speciation.

#### Original Data Collection
These experiments were performed by collecting individuals from one of eight locations around Spyros (4 mainland, 4 islet). Then indivudals were subjected to breeding preference, scent recognition, or general measurements in a lab environment. Breeding preference was measured over an hour to see how frequently a pair would copulate successfully. Scent recognition and preference were idenified by seeing how often an individual would lick a sample of another individual's scent. When refering to "general measurements" I mean body size, snout width and depth as well as information taken from certain genetic markers via sequencing. There are a lot of data availiable on this system and I will do my best to incorporate information from all of these sources in order to answer questions about how differentiated these populations are, whether genetic drift may be playing a role in their divergence and if they are on their way to speciation.

#### Format of Data
The data from each study comes in .xlsx documents which can be easily converted to .csv. Each experimental data set is approximately 100 kB (127kB for pheromonal data, 88 kB for breeding data). The genetic data uploaded to Dyrad has been condensed to just describe the microsatellite data so each spreadsheet is less than 100 kB. 
I have noticed some descrepancies in the data. For each experiment there are some points which have blanks in one or more column. I will likely have to remove those experimental iteration from my analysis. But even with this, the replication sizes should still be large enough to provide new information on the potential speciation of this lizard species.

### Analysis to be Done
My first step will be to determine a compatibility factor based on successful copulation versus "escapes" in breeding experiences between lizards from the same and different locations. Then that will be plotted along the distance between the two areas that those lizards were collected from. The same analysis along distance can be done for pheromonal and morphological combatibility. I will then plot a regression to determine how this distance gradient (across land *and* sea) impacts the premating isolation and thus potential future speciation. Then, as time and the data permits, I may be able to incorporate genetic relatedness into the study. This relatedness is measured from microsatellite data and though the direct relatedness v. islet or mainland relationship has already been studied, relating it to these other factors (compatibility, pheromonal interest, similarity in snout morphology) could yield new insights. 

### References
Runemark A, Svensson EI (2012) Sexual selection as a promoter of population divergence in male phenotypic characters? A study on mainland and islet lizard populations. Biological Journal of the Linnean Society 106(2): 374-389. [https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1095-8312.2012.01866.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1095-8312.2012.01866.x)
Runemark A, Svensson EI (2012) Data from: Sexual selection as a promoter of population divergence in male phenotypic characters? A study on mainland and islet lizard populations. Dryad Digital Repository. [https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.m1fp77jg](https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.m1fp77jg)
Runemark A, Gabirot M, Svensson EI (2011) Population divergence in chemical signals and the potential for premating isolation between islet- and mainland populations of the Skyros wall lizard (Podarcis gaigeae). Journal of Evolutionary Biology 24(4): 795–809. [https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1420-9101.2010.02214.x](https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1420-9101.2010.02214.x)
Runemark A, Gabirot M, Svensson EI (2011) Data from: Population divergence in chemical signals and the potential for premating isolation between islet- and mainland populations of the Skyros wall lizard, (Podarcis gaigeae). Dryad Digital Repository. [https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.8265](https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.8265)
Runemark A, Sagonas K, Svensson EI (2015) Ecological explanations to island gigantism: dietary niche divergence, predation and size in an endemic lizard. Ecology 96: 2077-2092. [https://doi.org/10.1890/14-1996.1](https://doi.org/10.1890/14-1996.1)
Runemark A, Sagonas K, Svensson EI (2015) Data from: Ecological explanations to island gigantism: dietary niche divergence, predation and size in an endemic lizard. Dryad Digital Repository. [https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.kb874](https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.kb874)



